# Collaborative git exercise

> Practice with branches, fetches, merges, and pushes

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Initial code description

`code/01_make_output1.R`

  - generates random numbers
  - saves numbers as a `.rds` object in `output/` folder

`code/02_render_report.R`

  - renders `report.Rmd`

`report.Rmd`

  - reads random numbers generated by `code/01_make_output1.R`
  - makes three histograms

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Collaborative git exercise description

### Determine users

Assign one partner to be *User A* and one partner to be *User B*.

### User A: Confirm code base is stable

*User A* should download and unzip the project files. If needed, move the files/directory to a desired location on *User A*'s computer either using the command line or a file browser.

Once the files are in the desired location, confirm that *User A* can build the report by executing `make`.

- If the report does not build, correct code until it builds correctly

*User B* __does not__ need to download and unzip the project folder because they will download it in a later step from *User A*'s GitHub.

### User A: Initialize git repository

*User A* should initialize a local git repository.

1. Use `git init` to initialize a git repository in your project directory folder
2. Appropriately use `git status`, `git add`, and `git commit` to create your first commit. The commit should include: 
	- all contents of the `code` directory
	- `report.Rmd`
	- `README.md`
	- `Makefile`
	- `.gitignore`
	- the `output` directory (i.e., the `output/.gitkeep` file)

### User A: create a GitHub repository

*User A* should create a GitHub repository using the following steps.

1. Log in to GitHub and create an empty GitHub repository.
- be sure to select the option not to add a README nor a license.
- choose any name for the repository you like
2. *User A* uses `git remote add origin git@github.com:<user_a_github_name>/<user_a_repo_name>` to add *User A*'s GitHub repository as a remote of *User A*'s local repository named `origin`.
- replace `<user_a_github_name>` and `<user_a_repo_name>` with *User A*'s GitHub user name and GitHub repository name, repsectively
- be sure to use the "ssh" style syntax for adding a remote and not "https". I.e., your command should be `git remote add origin git@github.com:...` and __not__ `git remote add origin https://github.com/...`.
- You can confirm what web address was used to add the remote by executing `git remote -v`. - If the output of `git remote -v` shows that `origin` points to `https://github.com/<user_a_github_name>/<user_a_repo_name>`, then *User A* should remove the origin `remote` using `git remote remove origin` try Step 2 again.
3. Use `git push origin <your_branch_name>` to push *User A*'s local repository to GitHub.
- `<your_branch_name>` is probably `main`, but it may be `master` for some of you
4. Refresh the web page for *User A*'s GitHub repository's to confirm that the push was successful.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### User B: Fork and clone the repository

*User B* should now fork and clone *User A*'s repository on GitHub using the following steps.

1. *User B* should navigate to `https://github.com/<user_a_name>/<user_a_repo>` and click "Fork" to create a fork of *User A*'s repository.
- replace `<user_a_name>` with *User A*'s GitHub user name
- replace `<user_a_repo>` with *User A*'s GitHub repository name
- Recall that this creates a copy of *User A*'s GitHub repository on *User B*'s GitHub.
2. *User B* should use `cd` in their terminal to navigate to a directory where they wish to download *User A*'s repository.
3. *User B* should execute `git clone git@github.com:<user_b_name>/<user_b_repo>` to clone the repository.
- be sure to use the `git@github.com:<user_b_name>/<user_b_repo>` syntax and __not__ `https://github.com/<user_b_name>/<user_b_repo>` syntax.
4. The `git clone` command will download a folder called `<user_b_repo>` into your current working directory. *User B* should confirm that a folder called `<user_b_repo>` was added to the current working directory of their terminal.
- E.g., use `ls` to view the contents of your current working directory. You should see a directory called `<user_b_repo>`
5. Use `cd <user_b_repo>` to change your working directory to this directory.
6. Use `git remote -v` to confirm that the remote was set up properly.

### User B: Update the repository and submit a pull request

*User B* will now make a new branch and make updates to *User A*'s repo on that branch. *User B* should complete the following steps:

1. Create and checkout a new branch called `binomial` by executing `git checkout -b binomial`.
- recall that this simultaneously creates and checks out a new branch called `binomial`
- confirm that *User B* has switched to the new branch by executing `git branch`
  - you should see a star next to `binomial`
2. Add the following lines to `code/01_make_output.R` (ignore the lines with back ticks):

```r
set.seed(4)
random_numbers4 <- rbinom(100, 1, 0.25)
```

3. Add additional lines of code to save `random_numbers4` object into the `output` folder.
4. Confirm that `random_numbers4` gets created and saved properly (e.g., by running `make random_numbers`).
5. Add a few lines of code to `report.Rmd` to read in `random_numbers4.rds` and then add a new section to `report.Rmd` called "Random numbers 4"
- the contents of the section should be exactly the same as the other sections
- e.g., *User B* can copy/paste the "Random numbers 3" section and appropriately modify its contents
6. Confirm that *User B* can build the report (e.g., by executing `make report.html`)
7. Once *User B* is confident that `report.html` is building properly, they should appropriately use `git add` and `git commit` to make a new commit along the `binomial` branch that includes updates to *both* `code/01_make_output.R` *and* `report.Rmd`
- include a meaningful commit message
8. Push the `binomial` branch to GitHub.
- `git push origin binomial`
9. Submit a pull request to *User A*'s repository.
- the pull request should request that *User B*'s `binomial` branch be merged into *User A*'s `main` branch.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### User A: test out pull request code

*User A* will now `fetch` the code submitted by *User B*, test it out, and eventually merge it into their `main` branch, thereby closing the pull request.

1. *User A* should add *User B*'s repository as a remote.
- `git remote add <user_b_remote_name> https://github.com/<user_b_name>/<user_b_repo>`
	- in this case, it's OK to use the `https://` syntax, because *User A* does not need to push to *User B*'s repository.
	- "ssh"-style syntax would also be fine here
- replace `<user_b_remote_name>` with whatever you would like to call this remote
- replace `<user_b_name>` with *User B*'s GitHub user name
- replace `<user_b_repo>` with *User B*'s GitHub repository name

2. *User A* should `fetch` from *User B*'s repository.
- `git fetch <user_b_remote_name>`
- Recall that this command downloads the contents of *User B*'s repository, but does not yet put them on any of *User A*'s local branches.

3. *User A* should create and checkout a new branch named `binomial` from the `<user_b_remote_name>/binomial` branch.
- `git checkout -b binomial <user_b_remote_name>/binomial`
- Recall that this creates a new branch in *User A*'s repository called `binomial` that looks exactly like the branch `fetch`'ed from *User B*'s remote.

4. *User A* should test out the code on the `binomial` branch.
- E.g., confirm that the report builds properly when you execute `make`
- If the code does not work, *User A* should make corrections to the code and commit those changes to their `binomial` branch.

5. When *User A* is satisfied that the code works as expected, they should merge the `binomial` branch into `main`.
- `git checkout main`
- `git merge binomial`

6. *User A* should push the updated `main` branch to GitHub.
- `git push origin main`
- Both users should now see *User B*'s pull request as "merged" on GitHub.

### User A: More changes

1. *User A* should create and checkout a new branch called `geometric`.
- `git checkout -b geometric`
- Recall that this simultaneously creates and checks out a new branch called `geometric` in *User A*'s local repository.

2. Add the following lines to `code/01_make_output.R` (ignore the lines with back ticks):

```r
set.seed(5)
random_numbers5 <- rgeom(100, 0.25)
```

3. Add additional lines of code to save `random_numbers5` object into the `output` folder.
4. Confirm that `random_numbers5` gets created and saved properly (e.g., by running `make random_numbers`).
5. Add a few lines of code to load `random_numbers5.rds` in `report.Rmd` and add a new section to `report.Rmd` called "Random numbers 5"
- the contents of the section should be exactly the same as the other sections
- e.g., *User A* can copy/paste the "Random numbers 3" section and appropriately modify its contents
6. Confirm that *User A* can build the report (e.g., by executing `make report.html`)
7. Once *User A* is confident that `report.html` is building properly, they should appropriately use `git add` and `git commit` to make a new commit along the `geometric` branch that includes updates to *both* `code/01_make_output.R` *and* `report.Rmd`
- include a meaningful commit message
8. *User A* should merge the `geometric` branch into `main`.
- `git checkout main`
- `git merge geometric`
9. *User A* should push both the `geometric` and `main` branches to GitHub
- `git push origin geometric`
- `git push origin main`

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### User B update local repository

1. *User B* should add a remote called `upstream` that points to *User A*'s GitHub repository.
- `git remote add upstream https://github.com/<user_a_name>/<user_a_repo>`
	- in this case, it's OK to use the `https://` syntax, because *User B* does not need to push to *User A*'s repository.
	- "ssh"-style syntax would also be fine here

2. *User B* should `fetch` from the `upstream` remote and merge `upstream/main` into `main`
- `git fetch upstream`
	- Recall that this downloads the contents of *User A*'s repository (i.e., the `upstream` remote) to *User B*'s computer; however, it does not add *User A*'s commits/branches to *User B*'s local branches.
- `git checkout main`
	- *User B* needs to be on their `main` branch to merge in changes from *User A*'s GitHub repository.
- `git merge upstream/main`
	- Recall that this will update *User B*'s local files on the `main` branch to look like *User A*'s files from GitHub.
	- To confirm, *User B* could look in `report.Rmd` and locate the `random_numbers5`-associated code.
3. *User B* should `push` their `main` branch to `origin`.
- `git push origin main`

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Submit to canvas

You should submit a text entry that contains a link to User A and User B's GitHub repositories. Example:

User A: https://github.com/userA/repo

User B: https://github.com/userB/repo


------------------------------------------------------------------------


## Reverse roles and repeat

If you have time, reverse roles of User A and B and repeat the exercise. However, you should not delete the GitHub repository associated with the first run through of the exercise, as you will be graded based on that repository. Make a new repository that has a different name than the one you submitted to Canvas.
